BSV Unified Merkle Path (BUMP) Format (#56)
bitcoin-sv/BRCs: transactions/0074.md

fdfb02 // offset VarInt
00 // data follows
02 // nLeaves VarInt at level 1
fdf405 // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
0671394f72237d08a4277f4435e5b6edf7adc272f25effef27cdfe805ce71a81 // leaf 1 at 1st level of tree
fdf505 // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
262bccabec6c4af3ed00cc7a7414edea9c5efa92fb8623dd6160a001450a5282 // leaf 2 at 1st level of tree
04 // nLeaves VarInt at level 0
fde80b // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
11774f01d26412f0d16ea3f0447be0b5ebec67b0782e321a7a01cbdf7f734e30 // leaf 1 at 0 level of tree
fde90b // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
004e53753e3fe4667073063a17987292cfdea278824e9888e52180581d7188d8 // leaf 2 at 0 level of tree
fdea0b // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
5e441996fc53f0191d649e68a200e752fb5f39e0d5617083408fa179ddc5c998 // leaf 3 at 0 level of tree
fdeb0b // offset VarInt
00 // no data follows
```

## JSON Encoding

In the JSON encoding - we start with a height for the whole BUMP. A path Array index corresponds to the height within the Merkle tree, so we start with level 0 which is the txids themselves. Within each array element we contain one or more leaves which are specified as an offset number as the key and a leaf as the value.  

> `{ [offset]: leaf }` This is to aid in the speed of merkle root calculation, since the offset is given, and so can be used to lookup the corresponding value directly rather than having to iterate through all leaves.  

Reviewer: I like that approach with switching offset and leaf places it this format, comparing to the Compound Merkle Path.

A `*` indicates an absence of a value at this position, and so a duplication of the working hash should be used in its place as this is at the right hand side of the merkle tree at that level.

### JSON Example
```json
{

>   "height": 813706,

Reviewer: To make it 100%, I would suggest to name that field `blockHeight`

  "path": [
    {
      "3048": "304e737fdfcb017a1a322e78b067ecebb5e07b44f0a36ed1f01264d2014f7711",
      "3049": "d888711d588021e588984e8278a2decf927298173a06737066e43f3e75534e00",
      "3050": "98c9c5dd79a18f40837061d5e0395ffb52e700a2689e641d19f053fc9619445e",
      "3051": "*"
    },
    {
      "1524": "811ae75c80fecd27efff5ef272c2adf7edb6e535447f27a4087d23724f397106",
      "1525": "82520a4501a06061dd2386fb92fa5e9ceaed14747acc00edf34a6cecabcc2b26"
    },
    {
      "763": "*"
    },
    {
      "380": "858e41febe934b4cbc1cb80a1dc8e254cb1e69acff8e4f91ecdd779bcaefb393"
    },
    {
      "191": "*"
    },
    {
      "94": "f80263e813c644cd71bcc88126d0463df070e28f11023a00543c97b66e828158"
    },
    {
      "46": "f36f792fa2b42acfadfa043a946d4d7b6e5e1e2e0266f2cface575bbb82b7ae0"
    },
    {
      "22": "7d5051f0d4ceb7d2e27a49e448aedca2b3865283ceffe0b00b9c3017faca2081"
    },
    {
      "10": "43aeeb9b6a9e94a5a787fbf04380645e6fd955f8bf0630c24365f492ac592e50"
    },
    {
      "4": "45be5d16ac41430e3589a579ad780e5e42cf515381cc309b48d0f4648f9fcd1c"
    },
    {
      "3": "*"
    },
    {

>       "0": "d40cb31af3ef53dd910f5ce15e9a1c20875c009a22d25eab32c11c7ece6487af"

Reviewer: Sorry, but I'm (and not only me) finding this super useful to have exactly the same example in binary and JSON format.

Author: Yes, to confirm the two examples are exactly the same data. The confusing thing is that hex string as displayed as little endian for bitcoin txids, so the byte order is reversed:  
```javascript
const hexString = "d40cb31af3ef53dd910f5ce15e9a1c20875c009a22d25eab32c11c7ece6487af"
const buffer = Buffer.from(hexString, 'hex').reverse()

^ that buffer is what gets concatenated in the merkle path calculation. Annoying I know but it's convention so we'll stick with it. It allows these things to be patented because it is an "unusual way to do it" hence anyone who copies it can easily be identified.

Author: Annoying I know but it's convention so we'll stick with it. It allows these things to be patented because it is an "unusual way to do it" hence anyone who copies it can easily be identified.

    } else {
      hash = '*'
    }
    path[treeHeight][offset] = hash
    x++
    if (x == startOfNextHeight) {
      treeHeight--
      if (treeHeight < 0) break
      nLeavesAtThisHeight = reader.readVarIntNum()
      startOfNextHeight = nLeavesAtThisHeight + x
    }
  }
  return { height, path }
}

function bumpJSONtoHex({ height, path }) {
  const bw = new Bw()
  bw.writeVarIntNum(height)
  let treeHeight = path.length - 1
  bw.writeUInt8(treeHeight)
  for (treeHeight; treeHeight >= 0; treeHeight--) {
    let nLeaves = Object.keys(path[treeHeight]).length
    bw.writeVarIntNum(nLeaves)
    for (const leaf in path[treeHeight]) {
      // offset
      bw.writeVarIntNum(Number(leaf))
      const value = path[treeHeight][leaf]
      // flag
      if (value === '*') {
        bw.writeUInt8(0)
      } else {
        bw.writeUInt8(1)
        bw.write(hexRevToBuf(value))
      }
    }
  }
  return bw.toBuffer().toString('hex')
}

function calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(bump, txid) {
  // Find the index of the txid at the lowest level of the Merkle tree
  let index
  for (let i in bump.path[0]) {
    if (txid === bump.path[0][i]) index = Number(i)
  }

>   if (!index) throw Error(`The CMP does not contain the txid: ${txid}`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if (!index) throw Error(`The BUMP does not contain the txid: ${txid}`)
```

calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(bump, '304e737fdfcb017a1a322e78b067ecebb5e07b44f0a36ed1f01264d2014f7711') // '57aab6e6fb1b697174ffb64e062c4728f2ffd33ddcfa02a43b64d8cd29b483b4'
calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(bump, 'd888711d588021e588984e8278a2decf927298173a06737066e43f3e75534e00') // '57aab6e6fb1b697174ffb64e062c4728f2ffd33ddcfa02a43b64d8cd29b483b4'
calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(bump, '98c9c5dd79a18f40837061d5e0395ffb52e700a2689e641d19f053fc9619445e') // '57aab6e6fb1b697174ffb64e062c4728f2ffd33ddcfa02a43b64d8cd29b483b4'
bumpJSONtoHex(bump)
```

## Merging

A note on compounding multiple BUMPs together. The first check should always be the height - ensure it matches. The second check is the root. Each BUMP calculates its root, and if they don't match - you cannot combine them. If they  match then the process is a simple inclusion of all leaves, dropping duplicates.

```javascript
function combinePaths(one, two) {

>   if (one.height !== two.height) throw Error('You cannot combine paths which do not have the same height.')
>   const txid1 = Object.keys(one.path[0])[0]
>   const root1 = calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(one, one.path[0][txid1])
>   const txid2 = Object.keys(two.path[0])[0]
>   const root2 = calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(two, two.path[0][txid2])
>   if (root1 !== root2) throw Error('You cannot combine paths which do not have the same root.')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if (one.height !== two.height) throw new Error('You cannot combine paths which do not have the same height.')
  const txid1 = Object.keys(one.path[0])[0]
  const root1 = calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(one, one.path[0][txid1])
  const txid2 = Object.keys(two.path[0])[0]
  const root2 = calculateMerkleRootFromBUMP(two, two.path[0][txid2])
  if (root1 !== root2) throw new Error('You cannot combine paths which do not have the same root.')
```

01 // data follows
5881826eb6973c54003a02118fe270f03d46d02681c8bc71cd44c613e86302f8 // leaf at 5th level of tree
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 6
2e // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
e07a2bb8bb75e5accff266022e1e5e6e7b4d6d943a04faadcf2ab4a22f796ff3 // leaf at 6th level of tree
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 7
16 // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
8120cafa17309c0bb0e0ffce835286b3a2dcae48e4497ae2d2b7ced4f051507d // leaf at 7th level of tree
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 8
0a // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
502e59ac92f46543c23006bff855d96f5e648043f0fb87a7a5949e6a9bebae43 // leaf at 8th level of tree
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 9
04 // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
1ccd9f8f64f4d0489b30cc815351cf425e0e78ad79a589350e4341ac165dbe45 // leaf at 9th level of tree
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 10
03 // offset VarInt
00 // no data follows
01 // nLeaves VarInt at level 11
00 // offset VarInt
01 // data follows
af8764ce7e1cc132ab5ed2229a005c87201c9a5ee15c0f91dd53eff31ab30cd4 // leaf at 11th level of tree
// we know this is the end of the data because the tree height is 12 and there are 11 levels of branches to encode with a Merkle Tree of height of 12
```

## JSON Encoding

> In the JSON encoding - we start with a height for the whole BUMP. A path Array index corresponds to the height within the Merkle tree, so we start with level 0 which is the txids themselves. Within each array element we contain one or more leaves which are specified as an offset number as the key and a leaf as the value.  

Reviewer: If I understand your question correctly, 
then good point, this description should be something like:

```suggestion
In the JSON encoding - we start with a height of a block in which transactions from BUMP are mined. A path Array index corresponds to the height within the Merkle tree, so we start with level 0 which is the txids themselves. Within each array element we contain one or more leaves which are specified as an offset number as the key and a leaf as the value.  
```
